# Day 3 : Mull It Over

Question [Link](https://adventofcode.com/2024/day/3)

# Part 1
"Our computers are having issues, so I have no idea if we have any Chief Historians in stock! You're welcome to check the warehouse, though," says the mildly flustered shopkeeper at the North Pole Toboggan Rental Shop. The Historians head out to take a look.

The shopkeeper turns to you. "Any chance you can see why our computers are having issues again?"

The computer appears to be trying to run a program, but its memory (your puzzle input) is corrupted. All of the instructions have been jumbled up!

It seems like the goal of the program is just to multiply some numbers. It does that with instructions like mul(X,Y), where X and Y are each 1-3 digit numbers. For instance, mul(44,46) multiplies 44 by 46 to get a result of 2024. Similarly, mul(123,4) would multiply 123 by 4.

However, because the program's memory has been corrupted, there are also many invalid characters that should be ignored, even if they look like part of a mul instruction. Sequences like mul(4*, mul(6,9!, ?(12,34), or mul ( 2 , 4 ) do nothing.

For example, consider the following section of corrupted memory:

xmul(2,4)%&mul[3,7]!@^do_not_mul(5,5)+mul(32,64]then(mul(11,8)mul(8,5))
Only the four highlighted sections are real mul instructions. Adding up the result of each instruction produces 161 (2*4 + 5*5 + 11*8 + 8*5).

Scan the corrupted memory for uncorrupted mul instructions. What do you get if you add up all of the results of the multiplications?

# Input 
[Link](https://github.com/yogesh1314/yogesh1314-mkdocs/blob/master/docs/aoc/24/ip/3.txt)

# Solution

## kdb+/q
```
ip: read0 `:aoc/24/ip/2.txt

l1:"J"$(r: " "vs/: ip)[;0]
l2:"J"$r[;3]

sum abs (desc l2) - desc l1
```

# Part 2
Your analysis only confirmed what everyone feared: the two lists of location IDs are indeed very different.

Or are they?

The Historians can't agree on which group made the mistakes or how to read most of the Chief's handwriting, but in the commotion you notice an interesting detail: a lot of location IDs appear in both lists! Maybe the other numbers aren't location IDs at all but rather misinterpreted handwriting.

This time, you'll need to figure out exactly how often each number from the left list appears in the right list. Calculate a total similarity score by adding up each number in the left list after multiplying it by the number of times that number appears in the right list.

Here are the same example lists again:

```
3   4
4   3
2   5
1   3
3   9
3   3
```
For these example lists, here is the process of finding the similarity score:

The first number in the left list is 3. It appears in the right list three times, so the similarity score increases by 3 * 3 = 9.
The second number in the left list is 4. It appears in the right list once, so the similarity score increases by 4 * 1 = 4.
The third number in the left list is 2. It does not appear in the right list, so the similarity score does not increase (2 * 0 = 0).
The fourth number, 1, also does not appear in the right list.
The fifth number, 3, appears in the right list three times; the similarity score increases by 9.
The last number, 3, appears in the right list three times; the similarity score again increases by 9.
So, for these example lists, the similarity score at the end of this process is 31 (9 + 4 + 0 + 0 + 9 + 9).

Once again consider your left and right lists. What is their similarity score?

Your puzzle answer was 19097157.

Both parts of this puzzle are complete! They provide two gold stars: **
# Solution

## kdb+/q
```
l3: l1 where l1 in l2
sum {x*count where l2=x}each l3
// take 2 - without function
sum l3*count each where each l2=/:l3
```